everything is it looks like about to get
underway and we can see the health
secretary him at Hancock who is arriving
now welcome back to Downing Street for
today's Daily coronavirus briefing I'm
joined by Sir Patrick valance the
government's chief scientific adviser
and Professor John Newton who is
coordinating our work on testing the
government is working through our action
plan which has as its core that we must
protect life and protect the NHS both by
slowing the spread of the virus so that
we flatten the curve and by ensuring
that the NHS is always there to treat
all people who need its care according
to the most recent figures five hundred
and eighty three thousand four hundred
and ninety six test for coronavirus have
now been carried out in the UK including
twenty three thousand five hundred and
sixty tests carried out yesterday a
hundred and thirty eight thousand and
seventy eight people have tested
positive for the virus that's an
increase of four thousand five hundred
and eighty three cases since yesterday
seventeen thousand six hundred and
fifteen people have sadly died seventeen
thousand six hundred and fifteen people
sorry are currently in hospital had
cracked myself with coronavirus down
from eighteen thousand one hundred and
eighty nine on the 21st of April and
sadly of those hospitalized eighteen
thousand seven hundred and thirty-eight
have now died and that is an increase of
616 fatalities since yesterday and
although this number is lower than it
has been in previous days I still stop
any think of each one they will not be
forgotten and their stories will live on
we must maintain our resolve and follow
the social distancing rules because they
are working
they're protecting the NHS and they're
saving lives to lift the measures too
soon and to risk a second peak would be
a mistake
it would undo all of the hard work
that's been done and it would be both
bad for our nation's health and for our
nation's economy we can only start to
change the measures when the NHS can
continue to cope when the operational
challenges have been met when the daily
death rate falls sustainably and
consistently when the rate of infection
is decreasing and most importantly when
there's no risk of a second peak we need
to bring the incidence of new infection
right down we'll then use a rigorous
program of test track and trace and keep
it down
so we can safely release more of the
restrictions and today I want to set out
the progress that we're making on test
track and trace which is such an
important part of the measures that
we're taking and the work that we're
doing first testing we set the goal of a
hundred thousand tests per day by the
end of this month I knew when we set it
that this was a challenging target
capacity is now ahead of our plans and
even overnight has increased from 40,000
to 51,000 and because capacity has
increased so substantially we're now
able to expand who can get the tests our
ultimate goal is that everyone who could
benefit from a test get a test but of
course we had to start by prioritizing
patients in hospital followed by NHS and
social care colleagues and by those in
care homes as we expanded the capacity
from just 2,000 tests a day at the start
of March to 10,000 tests a day at the
start of this month so we've been able
to further expand X
yes today I can go further we can make
it easier faster and simpler for any
essential worker in England who needs a
test to get a test from today employers
of essential workers who will will be
able to go on goth you K to get a test
for any of their staff who need a test
and from tomorrow any essential workers
who need a test will be able to book an
appointment on Gov themselves directly
this all applies for people in essential
workers households - who need a test
it's all part of getting Britain back on
her feet those included as essential
workers will be based on the list for
schools and education set out on gov
the whole process will be free and once
you've entered your details on the
website you'll get a text or an email
inviting you to book an appointment
after you've had your test results will
be sent out by text and a help desk will
be available to deal with queries people
who can't go online can still apply
through their employer I want to make it
as easy as possible for people to get a
test not least because we're talking
about people who are ill our network of
regional test sites has now reached over
30 locations right across the UK and
more being set up each day and I just
want to take this moment to applaud the
private companies who've been involved
as well as my team and team in public
health in England and the NHS boots
Amazon thermo Fisher ramdux Roche Oxford
nanopore GSK and Astra Zeneca they've
really stepped up to the mark and I'm
grateful to each and every one we're
also introducing home test kits and with
the support of the Armed Forces mobile
testing sites to the Armed Forces in the
mo D have played a vital role here and I
want to pay tribute to their work I
thought that yesterday's briefing
General Sir Nick Carter when he said
that
a virus had presented the single
greatest logistical challenge in his 40
years of service I thought that spoke
our truth our armed forces have played
their part in rising to this challenge
and I want to thank them all in addition
to testing essential workers we're also
using testing to find out how many
people have coronavirus and how many
people have had coronavirus these are
critical pieces of information to inform
our battle against this novel virus and
that we'll use to learn and we keep
learning about every day this week we've
begun one of the biggest virus infection
and antibody studies that this country
has ever seen this is a joint project
with the Office for National Statistics
bringing their experience of running
large household surveys and the
University of Oxford bringing their
world leading scientific expertise in
total twenty five thousand people will
take part in the first phase with plans
to expand it to up to 300,000 people
over the next 12 months participants
will provide regular samples taken from
self administered swabs and answer a few
short questions during home visits by
trained health workers will use these
tests to help us strengthen our
scientific understanding and informers
on the big choices that we have to make
about social distancing measures and how
we start returning to a more normal life
letters are arriving on doorsteps from
today please if you're asked take part
in this vital research for your country
the early signs from today are that
there is huge enthusiasm for those
who've received letters taking part in
this survey if you get a letter please
respond to it as soon as you can because
you will be doing your bit as we've
ramped up our ability to test in large
numbers and as we slow the spread of the
virus we also need to make sure we've
got the ability to trace contacts just
as effectively as we look ahead this is
critical to keep the virus under control
and so we're putting the infrastructure
in place now so that we can roll out
contact tracing on a large scale
we're currently testing the new NHS
contact tracing app if you become unwell
with symptoms of coronavirus you'll be
able to tell the NHS via this app the
app will then send an alert to other app
users that you've been in significant
contact with in recent days even before
you have the symptoms so that they know
and they can act accordingly
so we can get the test to people even if
they're asymptomatic if we're worried
that they have a significant they've
been in significant contact with someone
who has the disease we'll be able to let
them know but it's not just about the
technology we need the people too we
need to be really kick-starting contact
tracing as the new number of cases
begins to fall we're preparing for this
now by hiring an initial 18 thousand
people including over 3,000 clinicians
including public health specialists
we'll be training up the massed ranks of
our contact tracers over the coming
weeks and rollout the service this test
track and trace will be vital to stop a
second peak of the virus but recent
weeks have shown that there is something
we can all do and that's to follow the
rules on social distancing I am acutely
aware of how difficult this has been and
especially as we enter Ramadan a month
that is so special for so many people
these Ramadan many Muslims who serve
their country in the NHS and in the
Armed Forces and in so many other ways
will not be sharing the joy of this
month as they normally do I want to say
to all British Muslims thank you for
staying at home I know how important the
daily if there is how important communal
prayers are at night and how important
the Eid festival is thank you for making
major changes to these vital parts of
your practice and I want to say to you
all Ramadan Mubarak and thank you for
your service and citizenship and thank
you for your sacrifice
this will help so that we can together
emerge from this challenge all the more
United all the more grateful to one
another and all the more safe we've
traveled together too far to go
backwards now so please stay at home
protect the NHS and save lives
I'm now going to ask Sir Patrick to set
out the latest data on the charts thank
you very much can I have the first slide
please
a reminder on this slide that this virus
spreads between people when we get too
close when we have coughs when we
exchange because of contact all of us
have done a good job actually at staying
away from multiple contacts and you can
see on this slide actually 90% or more
in some cases if people have stayed away
from people outside the household we've
tried to avoid contact with vulnerable
people however difficult that has been
but it has made a big difference you can
also see that actually the number of
people who've managed to work from home
has actually increased so that has been
a really important part of making sure
that we reduce the chance of this virus
spreading and it's very clear that
actually the transmission in the
community is way down from what it was
so in terms of the infection spread
amongst the population the social
distancing is having a very big effect
next slide please
this shows new cases but I've said this
before and I'll say it again this is new
cases as determined by testing and there
are many more cases but we know that
those cases are coming down here it
looks fairly flat because it's the
testing slide what you can see here
though is that the number of people who
have been tested in for medical reasons
in blue is coming down slightly even on
this even though there are many more
tests being done and of course it's now
possible to test a number of essential
workers in the orange bar but the real
acid test is what's this turning into in
terms of the effects next slide please
this is the number of people in hospital
with Co vid and here you can see a very
clear decline in London you can see that
in other areas there are declines such
as in the Midlands and you can see in
nearly all areas this is flat or on the
way down so this speaks to the point but
as we've radically reduced the number of
infections in the community this has
turned into a reduction in the number in
hospital we're still at that period
coming through the peak but you can see
it's headed very much in the right
direction this in turn with a delay
translates into what happens in
intensive care units next slide please
an intensive care units you can see here
the percentage of beds being occupied
you can see that the number went up of
course
reached a plateau and is gradually
decreasing and as I've said before you'd
expect this to be a gradual decline and
to take longer than the decrease in
admissions I do want to say one other
thing about what's happening in
hospitals though there is a very large
clinical trial going on trying to work
out which medicines may make a
difference in this disease and one of
those studies has recruited 7,000
patients and there'll be results coming
out from that in due course I would just
urge as we enter the phase where the
plateau has been reached slight decrease
we can see we continue to make sure that
we enroll patients in clinical trials so
that we get the answers to the critical
questions about which medicines may work
final slide please not surprisingly we
know this is a problem in terms of the
severity of the disease that although
the number of patients in intensive care
units is coming down slowly the deaths
remain at a plateau coming down slightly
not coming down fast I would expect that
to continue for another couple of weeks
and we will then see a faster decline
thereafter it's crucially important
going back to the beginning
that we all keep firm with our attention
to social distancing because it's a VAT
in that we stop the progression through
hospital intensive care unit and
ultimately unfortunately for some people
to death and I think it's crucial that
we all do our part to keep this going
and you can see it's headed in the right
direction and we must stay firm with the
measures were taking thanks very much
ajahn if you update us on where we are
on on the testing program in a bit more
detail Thank You Secretary of State's I
want to use this opportunity to talk
about the why and the what of our
national testing program why do we need
it and what are we doing to make sure
everyone who would benefit from a test
can get one I should first explain when
we talk about testing we're talking
about two different types of tests the
first type is a swab test for the
presence of the virus the second type is
a blood test to show who has previously
had the virus swab testing is currently
our main focus because relatively few
people have had the virus at this point
in the pandemic swab tests can tell us
what treatment a patient should receive
when they come into hospital who needs
to be isolated in any care service and
which key workers who are currently self
isolating can safely return to work and
some 2/3 of those that we've been
testing have returned to work which is
very gratifying and we've seen some
reductions in the NHS sickness absence
results as a result in hospitals or care
homes where social distancing is more
difficult to achieve testing is vital to
help control outbreaks of infection
where they occur and finally swab tests
can help us understand the spread of the
disease across the population through
carefully designed surveys of the type
that secretary states just described the
one led by the Office for National
Statistics and Oxford University now
although a positive swab test is very
reliable I want to stress that a
negative result does not absolutely
guarantee that you're free of the virus
it is however a very good guide for
whether it's safe to return to work
blood testing by contrast can tell us
who has previously had the infection
again improving our understanding of
this
beretta the virus when used in surveys
and in individuals it may also be able
to tell us about the risks of future
infection which of course is so
important now if you have had the virus
you may have acquired some degree of
immunity I stress may because the
science on immunity is still uncertain
and in any case it also takes some time
for that immunity to build up and for
the test to be positive our five pillar
national testing program is decide is
designed to ensure that everyone who
needs a test can have one to make that
happen we're doing two things increasing
capacity for testing and increasing
access may I have the first slide please
on testing here we can see that our
secular state said we've now performed
more than 500,000 tests in the UK which
is and has been steadily increasing over
time if I could have the second slide
please
this slide shows the increase in the
capacity to undertake tests and we're
talking here about the swab tests and
compared to the start of the month you
can see that we have increased
substantially so that we can now do more
than 51,000 tests a day and the shape of
the curve is exponential you can see
that it's rapidly increasing at this
point which is what we expected now
we've done this by securing supplies of
kits and consumables from some of the
leading manufacturers that sector state
mentioned and now these are the very
best of their kind available in the
world we've also introduced new tests
new types of tests so at least for
example at least to NHS labs are now
using a test that has no RNA extraction
stage which means no no need for the
chemical reagents which are in such high
demand around the world and we've also
developed technology within the NHS to
direct capacity to where it's needed
most and that's made a huge difference
in addition we have the three new
lighthouse labs which are all now on
stream these are the ones in
Milton Keynes in Manchester and in
Glasgow each of these labs will be able
to process tens of thousands of tests
per day and we're introducing automation
into those processes which is which
really ramps up the capacity we've also
entered into partnerships with leading
labs in industry and academia in
addition to these other labs I've
mentioned already and this will help
increase volumes still further so we are
currently on track to reach a hundred
thousand tests per day as planned
in fact we're somewhat ahead of where we
thought we'd be at this stage now huge
amount of work has gone into this across
the board and I want to take this
opportunity to thank everyone involved
next we're increasing access to testing
so if I can have the next slide please
so you can see here from the map
particularly we already have that more
than thirty drive-thru centres and these
are increasing to around 48 as assertive
state mentioned home testing option is
also now in place and we will increase
this further we also want to use an
approach we call the satellite approach
where tests can test kits are delivered
in batches to a single site and then
returned in batches and then finally the
as you heard we are also currently
working with the army on a new pop-up
mobile testing option which was
developed for us by the army and is
really working very well so we have
we're going to have 48 of these pop-up
facilities which can travel around the
country to where they're needed most for
example in care homes now a key
development that will transform access
is this new web the web portals for
employers and for central workers to
refer themselves for a test all of this
together means that any essential worker
or member of their household who has
symptoms and would benefit from a test
will be able to get one at the same time
we are developing new and better blood
tests now these could be used to help
people assess their enjoyed individual
risk although as I've said the science
from this is incomplete and the existing
tests on the market do not work well
enough
for individual advice in fact no country
in the world is using them for that
purpose the existing tests can however
be used with care in surveys to
understand the spread of the virus so
just like our national effort on
vaccines the UK's top scientists are
working with industry and the NHS to
develop better blood tests we've made
good progress and several candidate
tests are now being evaluated once we've
identified the accurate tests they can
be provided in labs in large quantities
relatively easily much more easy to
scale up than the swab tests and fought
finally a public-private consortium the
UK rapid test consortium is working on a
method of getting antibody tests to
people at home so of course all this
testing capacity is needed now but not
just now or so for the future to support
the government's strategy as we move to
the next stage of the response to the
pandemic in the coming weeks and months
this you've heard from secretary state
we will need testing to keep the virus
under control with a test track and
trace program we will also need as I
mentioned intensive testing in settings
like hospitals and care homes including
of people who may not have symptoms to
prevent spread protect staff and save
lives and finally we will need testing
capacity to support these large repeated
surveys of population to assess the
ongoing situation so let me summarize
the current state of play as far as
testing days we have exponentially
increased our testing capacity and we
are on target to have capacity for a
hundred thousand tests a day we're
opening up access say that all essential
workers and members of their household
who have symptoms and could benefit from
a test can get one at the same time as
we've heard from sir patrick the success
of social distancing has almost
certainly reduced the number of people
who would benefit from a stage from a
test at this stage of the app of the
pandemic perhaps most important though
is that as we move to the next phase of
the response to the pandemic
I can say with confidence that we will
have the testing capability that we need
thank you thanks very much John and now
we'll open up to questions
first question Laura Koons berg of the
BBC and thank you very much Secretary of
State and there is broad public support
for the lockdown but the Scottish First
Minister the opposition and some of your
own MPs think you should be more
transparent about what might come next
are they all wrong because the five
tests you've set out are all about when
it might be time but not about how we
might move on into that next phase and
if I could ask Sir Patrick what do you
think the gap between the peaks in terms
of time could be in different parts of
the country
thanks thanks Laura well I understand
the thirst for knowledge but the the
tests that we've set out which are the
the basis from which others for instance
the Scottish Government have then
developed their plans those tests are
the critical tests for when changes can
be made and of course you know
monitoring what's happening and making
sure that we move at the right time is
absolutely critical but the message
remains to your viewers and to everybody
across the country the message remains
the same that people need to stay at
home to protect the NHS and save lives
and the reason that we have clarity on
that message is look it has succeeded in
bringing down and flattening the curve
but we are not through that yet and
there's an awful lot of work that still
needs to be done and we're absolutely
determined to avoid a second peak and so
we've set out precisely as you say the
five tests for when we should move
we haven't met them yet and therefore we
must keep the social distancing measures
in place it's worth remembering that
what we've done is really suppress the
numbers so this isn't a natural peak
this is a suppressed suppressed peak and
I think London is ahead of the rest of
the country maybe by a couple of weeks
but there's quite a loss of synchrony
right across the country actually it's
not massively different so I can't be
absolutely sure about this but I think
two or three weeks is is the sort of
order where you might expect to see some
differences
the country thanks very much at Robert
Peston ITV thanks Robert
okay good afternoon and a couple of
quick ones first of all if you look at
the it nark intensive care surveys it
does seem that people who are over
overweight are more at risk of becoming
acutely ill but being overweight is not
something that on the whole you talk
about as a risk factor is being
overweight a risk factor and secondly
and just to Patrick it wasn't that long
ago so Patrick that you said 20,000
deaths would be a good result it's very
clear there are gonna be more than
20,000 deaths this is not a blame thing
but what have you learned about this
virus and how its behaving look explains
why it's going to be considerably more
than 20,000 deaths and you have a sense
of in this phase how many deaths we're
likely to see thanks Robert I'll ask
John to answer there first and Patrick
to answer the second yes thank you
secular state um well yes Robert so the
the data you mentioned showed a number
of differences between the
characteristics of people receiving care
for coronavirus and the general
population in fact cetera State has
asked public health England to undertake
a detailed piece of research to look
into this working with academic
colleagues so we're certainly looking at
the relationship between obesity and
outcomes but also a number of other
factors such as ethnicity age and gender
even are all important factors so
there's a there's quite a lot of work to
do there are there are some in the data
that that we have there are some
techniques to try and assess by linkage
and so on how important these
differences are so there's a certain
amount of statistical work to do but
there's the it should be possible to get
an answer to some of those questions
reasonably soon thanks very much Patrick
in a way your your first question so
some peas don't answer the second one
there's a lot we don't know about this
virus I mean it's odd that you see this
obesity signal it's odd that it's got
such a gender difference
there are lots of things about this new
virus that we don't understand there are
lots of things that are being learned
quite fast there are lots of things that
we need to understand about the immunity
to it in terms of the numbers of deaths
I think it's difficult to speculate
exactly what that will look like at the
end of this it's very clear that there
have been large numbers right the way
across the world and I think the key
statistic that we need to look at going
forward is the overall excess deaths
which encompasses direct and indirect as
the CMO is laid out repeatedly so I'm
not going to try and put a number on
that clearly every death is absolutely
regrettable and affects many people and
our job is to try to make sure we
suppress this as far as we can and keep
those numbers down thanks very much Beth
Rigby at sky Thank You Secretary of
State and mr. Hancock faster a question
for you does a proper scale testing and
tracing system have to be up and running
before you're even countenance ease in
the lockdown and if so can you get that
ready by May the 7th and - sir Patrick
if I may do you intend to establish what
you think is at or a tolerable level of
community transmission based on not
overwhelming the NHS so allowing some
spread of the virus through the
population or is your aim to push they
new cases as low as possible
to control the virus well thanks both of
those questions are our four ultimately
for politicians because they are the big
judgments I'll ask Patrick to comment on
the science of the latter but ultimately
the judgments are made by the by the
cabinet on the advice of the scientists
on on the first there is no automatic
link between the two there is no
automatic link between the scale of test
track and trace and the and any changes
to the social distancing measures so I
wouldn't put a
Deadline on it in the way that you did
what I would say is that test track and
trace can done effectively can help to
suppress the transmission in a way that
allows you then to have lesser social
distancing rules and and critically test
track and trace works more effectively
when the rate of new cases is lower so
the lower the rate of new cases the more
effectively you can keep it down using
test track and trace rather than having
to use heavier social distancing
measures so the link between the two is
in fact that once you have full-blown
tracking and tracing with the tes
capacity that as John set out we're
increasing that allows you to to hold
down at the level of transmit the level
of transmission and under lesser so
social distancing rules but you've got
to get it down there first for test
track and race to be effective and that
comes to the second point which is that
our objective is to get the rate of
transmission down and that seems to have
happened because instead of an
exponential rise as we saw before we now
see a flattening of the curve and then
crucially to get the level of
transmission down as in the number of
new cases we so it's both about the rate
of change and the level so it appears
that we have got the rate they are
figure the rate of transmission lower
because we are we've flattened the curve
but we've got to see the number of cases
as well come down because then you can
use test track and trace to hold it down
so that's the way that those two things
fit together and it it's all part of a
piece and both of your questions are
entirely tied to each other which is why
it become all of this becomes a
strategic question rather than purely a
scientific question but it is of course
based on the science Patrick does that
absolutely right I mean we advised on
what measures needed to be put in place
to keep the numbers down below
a chess critical care capacity that was
absolutely crucial and looks like that
has been achieved and therefore that's
one really important step and we were
advising now on what measures need to be
in place in order to get those numbers
lower for the reason Secretary of State
said and what numbers necessary in order
to get down to trace and sort of test
track and trace approaches but the
decision on how far to go and which
measures should be released and so on
and ones for ministers
thanks very much Beth Ben Kentish from
LBC Thank You Secretary of State
everyone agrees that the contact the
track and trace method that you've been
talking about is going to be very
important in the coming weeks I wondered
if I could just ask you to give us a few
specifics how many of those eighteen
thousand traces are in place when do you
think you need to get to the eighteen
thousand how low roughly the case
numbers need to be before track and
trace can start to be in any way
effective and just the second question
if I may on science and face smart we
were behind other countries and going
into lockdown and we've been behind
other countries in scaling up our
testing capacity and it seems we're
behind other countries in the use of
face masks when I asked about this two
weeks ago for example that there was
never effective and that advice may
change is there a sense though that we
are a bit slow compared to other
countries in following the silence and a
risk that delay might mean given other
countries have been biding face marks
for their citizens for many weeks now
that there's a problem when it comes to
British people having access given
international shortages to effective
protection face masks thanks very much
so on the first question we're
recruiting now and we need to we've set
out in the first sentence that we're
recruiting eighteen thousand of whom
three thousand will be clinical
personnel and train up the other 15,000
that process is his on go
and in terms of when it will be ready
it's in a matter of weeks and that will
then you know help but critically it's
needed when we get the level of
transmission down on the second question
we've discussed the timings many times
before I don't accept the premise of the
question because the we followed the
science throughout this building on that
that that science and and the science
develops as we learn more about the
virus and as for making sure that we are
ready for any change in the science many
countries have been buying a face mask
as have we but the position on face
masks is is unchanged
we of course constantly the science on
that is being reviewed and we'll
consider updated scientific advice if
that's what we get as and as and when we
need to and also consider the sort of
knock-on implications that you talk
about because it is absolutely critical
that the face mask that we buy our first
and foremost for people in the NHS and
social care and other and other places
where they are clearly in clinical need
and that's what we've been buying the
face mask for Patrick anything to add on
it well I don't think I mean the
evidence on face masks has always been
quite variable quite weak quite
difficult to know exactly there's no
real trials on it and we will we've
undertaken a review will give our advice
to ministers and they'll make decisions
about what to do around that thanks very
much at Mesa Hall from the Express Thank
You Secretary of State question first to
Sir Patrick in the early stages of this
crisis you told us that social
distancing measures shouldn't be
introduced too quickly because of the
dangers of long-term public fatigue
what is your behavioral modeling telling
you now about the public's willingness
to continue enduring these restrictions
and it's the increased road traffic and
people on the streets that we've seen
this week is that a sign that some
people's patience ease is being to wear
out and Secretary of State as we prepare
to applaud our NHS workers again tonight
can you tell us what progress the
government has made in to provide
improved support for the relatives of
those doctors nurses and other medical
staff who lose their lives in this
emergency dozens of MPs have been
calling for a scheme similar to that
that operates for grieved Armed Forces
Families is this something that you
would consider thank you very much
mesa i'll ask patrick to answer the the
first on the endurance of people support
all for the lockdown measures all I'd
say is I think it's been absolutely
phenomenal how the people how the
British people have responded when when
we've asked them to do something that is
quite difficult to to follow those new
social distancing rules they have they
have risen to that and I'm very proud of
them the on the on the second point and
of course it isn't just applause for the
NHS it's clap for our carers including
Social Care and I think one of the good
things about this crisis is the is the
clarity with which people who work in
social care and do such important work
there have seen that the country cares
for and is grateful to them to on the
important question that you asked about
a support for the families of those
who've lost their lives of course this
is something that I'm looking into and I
hope to be able to say something more
about it very soon Patrick well on the
social distancing we said at the outset
that it's important to break
transmission between households to lower
the rate of transmission and social
distancing clearly is the way that you
can do that and it needs to be
sustainable and I think if you look at
the evidence the data actually it looks
like people are really doing a very very
good job on that and it is sustaining so
I don't think there's evidence that this
is tailing off and it's important that
we carry on with it for all the reasons
that have have been said so I think the
moment things look very good there and
it is reducing the our it has produced
the are dramatically and we suspect
there will be far fewer infections in
the community as a result final thing
I'd say may sir is that I pay tribute to
the support that the Daily Express has
shown for our health and
and care staff throughout this crisis
with constant messages of support which
I know that my colleagues are appreciate
at Joe Murphy from the Evening Standard
every state um it's really encouraging
to see that curve for London coming down
so patrick said london was two weeks
ahead of other regions wouldn't it make
sense and perhaps save thousands of
firms from going but and hundreds of
thousands of jobs from being lost
if london could start coming out of
lockdown two weeks ahead of regent who
aren't so lucky at mobile and could I
just ask professor Newton at the same
time doctors are telling us that you
can't rely on certificates of cause of
death to make figures on how many
patients have died sorry how many people
in the community have died of
coronavirus because doctors are not
always writing coab is 19 on the
certificate because they don't know
without a test wouldn't it make sense to
start testing every person who died in a
care home with any sort of symptom so
that the figures could be more accurate
thank you I'll ask Sir Patrick to answer
the first and professor Newton to answer
the second and the only thing I want to
add is that the point about supporting
those who live in care homes is
incredibly important in front of mind
and the and we've already expanded the
availability of testing to those in care
homes including to asymptomatic
residents in care homes and it's a very
important part of the testing program so
Patrick what I said was that there's
more similarities and differences and
there may be up to two or three weeks
differences in some places so it's not
that London's two weeks ahead of
everywhere there's actually a lot of
similarities across a number of areas
including big urban areas and so I don't
think you should take the message at all
that there is two weeks difference
between London the rest of the country
they may be
up to two weeks in some parts of the
country that's that's the point in terms
of releasing measures you've only had to
look at the way in which this disease
can spread in cities in in urban
environments to know that the release of
the measure is something you want to do
absolutely when you're sure you've got
on top of it that's the right time to do
it and to make sure that you don't get
re importations across the country and
so how this is done I think is a matter
for ministers to make decisions on but
you can see it's really not the
straightforward as saying because you
hit the peak two weeks early you can
release things two weeks early it
depends on absolute numbers and it
depends on a number not the number of
other factors thanks Joe did you have
another you absolutely right so one of
the reasons for wanting to have more
available testing is to get better
statistics and understand these the data
better but in fact we have all always
been testing people residents in care
homes over 11,000 people have already
been tested in care homes in a secretary
state we're rolling out very significant
capacity to test all people in care
homes but in any case public health
England has been looking at these data
carefully so we're able to even if the
doctor doesn't write coronavirus on the
death certificate we know by linking
together the data that we have on the
test with national records when a
patient dies which goes through to the
national and national register so we
were already able to pick up quite a lot
that way and so we there will be some we
the will we will have been missing a few
but perhaps not as many as your question
implied but it is it's very important to
emphasize the fact that we need better
data in care homes and that will help us
to look after people protect them and
save lives in care homes as well as in
the NHS thank you thanks Joe
I've got Jody dr. Cove from the Brighton
Argus yeah good day good afternoon it
was six days between the first case in
brighton and hove and a nursing home in
the city calling out for a proper
protective equipment and testing after a
class or cases among patients and staff
what steps is the government now taken
to reduce outbreaks in care homes
and have you considered limiting agency
workers to one or two homes to reduce
the spread between them secondly many
people are still coming down to Brighton
Beach flouncing lockdown rules despite
efforts from the local council and base
what else can be done to limit the
number of people coming to destinations
like Brighton on the weekend well thanks
very much
Jody there's a huge effort underway to
limit the spread of this disease in care
homes and I followed the I followed the
the reports from the care homes in
Brighton very closely and as you say and
there was a significant gap between the
first positive case in Brighton and the
first reported cases in care homes and
what we've been able to do recently is
expand the amount of testing so that
anybody who has symptoms in a care home
now gets tested and as of yesterday
we've introduced the testing of people
who don't have symptoms in care homes
for exactly the sort of reasons that you
set out so that so that everybody who
can benefit from a test who is a
resident in a care home can now get a
test and the amount of work that's gone
on is reflects the importance of
supporting people who live in care homes
and trying to make sure that they are
protected not least because and people
who live in care homes are often amongst
the most vulnerable to this to this
disease as for people going to the beach
in Brighton I think the police have done
a good job I've also seen reports of the
police stopping people from having
barbecues on the beach and making sure
that people followed the social
distancing rules and the rules are there
for a reason and that's because people
need to follow the rules in order to
protect the NHS and to slow the spread
of this virus and what I'd say to people
in Brighton and the rest of the country
is that the measures that we're taking
are working they're supported by the
vast majority
of people in this country and everyone
should follow the social distancing
rules because that is how we come
through this as a city and as a country
finally Hannah Roger from The Herald
hello hello hi there I'm equation for
the Secretary of C and one for Sir
Patrick
so sex you see em today the Scottish
government has produced a detailed 25
feed report on their exit strategy from
the lockdown and necklace sturgeon our
First Minister said that she wants to
have an adult discussion and she wants
to receive feedback from the Scottish
public on her plan and my question to
you as why as the UK government being
unable thus far to produce a similarly
detailed plan which not only can be
scrutinized by the members of the public
but can also be used to get people some
hope and my question for Sir Patrick as
the the Scottish government report today
says one of the ways forward of the
lockdown could be to Beadie restrictions
based on geography professional sector
and by specific demographics and groups
of the population and do you agree that
this is something that should be
considered and as it's something that
you yourself might take into
consideration when looking at the exit
strategy for the Yukie thanks very much
Hannah and we've set out the five tests
that are needed for us to make changes
to the lockdown measures and the
Scottish Government's proposals are
based on those tests I think that having
the the four nations of the UK have
worked together on this and has been
important thus far not just on social
distancing but also for instance on
testing and I think that the country has
essentially moved together
and you can see that in the flattening
of the curve which has essentially
happened in all regions and nations of
the UK together and I think that it's
important that you know I was having set
out the test and now the Scottish
Government having set out their approach
which is which is very similar the based
on those five tests we've set out I
think that that the UK wide approach is
the best way to go just to echo that the
scientists are all working together and
actually we're very close closely
working with the chair of the Scottish
science advice group who joins us as
well for our meetings and we share
information and we look at all the same
things and the modeling is shared so
that people don't have to repeat what
others are doing and so this is very
much a unified approach to looking at
the different different options and the
impact that they could have in terms of
social distancing which is the key thing
how do you make sure you reduce the
contacts in a way that allows the artist
a below one and allow things to return
more towards normal in due course thanks
very much indeed
that concludes the Downing Street
coronavirus briefing for today and I'll
no doubt see you again soon thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News
you